1  Introduction  In the modern world, plastics and synthetic polymers have been integrated into every aspect of our daily lives (  Potnuri et al., 2022b ). Every piece of synthetic plastic ever created still exists in some form on Earth, which now constitutes a major environmental issue ( Geyer et al., 2017 ). The adaptability and convenient qualities of synthetic polymers have led to their widespread use. However, there is an urgent need for new, sustainable methods to combat plastic pollution, given that current methods have proven ineffective against the accumulation of plastic waste ( Sridevi et al., 2022 ). Plastic biodegradation has emerged as an environmentally sound and long-term solution that also facilitates recycling ( Potnuri et al., 2022c ; Sangiorgio et al., 2021 ). Despite the problems surrounding the disposal of plastics, they offer opportunities to reshape their role in the context of circular usage and recycling. Additionally, they are an essential and replaceable material in many industries, which amplifies the need for new, sustainable methods to reduce plastic pollution (  Sridevi et al., 2022 ). Research is now shifting toward environmentally friendly methods involving physical and chemical technologies, which are mainstays of plastic waste recycling ( Evangelopoulos et al., 2019 ; Suriapparao et al., 2022b ). Recycled plastics undergo a physical or chemical transformation, resulting in generally lower-quality plastic products, or downcycling (  Kiran Naik et al., 2021 ; Potnuri et al., 2023b ). However, microorganisms and enzymes are able to break down a wide range of common synthetic polymers, such as polyethylene (PE), polystyrene (PS), polypropylene (PP), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polyurethane (PUR), and polyethylene terephthalate (PET) ( Hamzah et al., 2024 ; Mistry et al., 2023 ; Potnuri et al., 2023a ; Sangiorgio et al., 2021 ), which also results in recyclable end products ( Potnuri et al., 2022c ; Sangiorgio et al., 2021 ). In Table 1  , we have summarized some procedural aspects of various plastic recycling techniques. Biotechnological upcycling is regarded as a more profitable and more effective method to address global plastic disposal problems. Upcycling is a concept that combines recycling with improvements to existing items to create new products with added value. To upcycle plastics, valuable components must be retrieved from plastic waste (  Potnuri et al., 2022b ; Sagong et al., 2021 ; Suriapparao et al., 2022a ). Fig. 1  depicts the development of waste plastic recycling routes based on biological recycling. This review focuses mainly on biotechnological upcycling, as biocatalysis normally operates under accessible conditions with environmentally friendly procedures (i.e., ambient temperature, near-neutral pH range, and atmospheric pressure), thus limiting greenhouse gas emissions and energy consumption ( Onda et al., 2020 ; Potnuri et al., 2023c ). Production of value-added fatty acids from polypropylene (PP) via a pyrolysis-based bioconversion process has been reported by Mihreteab et al. (2019) and Hamzah et al. (2022) . Recent research has identified specific microorganisms and enzymes capable of breaking down the most common types of plastic, which can operate in conjunction with biological processes to recycle the plastic. Here, we attempt to develop a biotechnology strategy for depolymerization, along with biotechnological approaches to plastic degradation and synthetic biology applications that could depolymerize waste plastic and use the small depolymerization products as feedstock for the production of high-quality compounds ( Blank et al., 2020 ; Potnuri et al., 2023b ). Such a strategy would help reduce plastic waste, improve recycling systems, and advance the circular economy. The yearly and overall numbers of papers published on plastic biodegradation and valorization from 2013 to 2023 are presented in  Fig. 2  . The number of publications was extracted from Science Direct (1057), Web of Science (68), and the Wiley Online Library (339). These publications include review articles, research articles, encyclopedias, book chapters, conference abstracts, editorials, mini-reviews, short communications, and other articles. The bar graph illustrates the rapid growth in the field of plastic biodegradation and valorization over the past decade. These data suggest a recent steep increase in publication rates on topics related to the “circular economy” and “plastics.”   2  Mechanism of biological and enzymatic degradation  The large volume of plastic produced globally and the rate at which it has grown over the last five years (2015–2020) demonstrates the need for waste management strategies specific to plastic for environmental protection (  Wang et al., 2020 ). A wide range of microorganisms, including fungi and bacteria, have been identified as capable of degrading polyesters via a variety of enzymes produced by these organisms. Microorganisms can contribute to the biodegradation of both synthetic and natural polymers. Microorganisms are primarily responsible for the size reduction of polymers as they colonize the plastic surface, converting it to monomers that can be ingested by the cells. Within these cells, additional processes with these monomeric units occur via enzymatic degradation, employing the monomers as carbon source to support growth. The process can be altered by via chemical or physical plastics pre-treatments, such as heating, cooling, freezing, thawing, and chemical degradation, and prior to bacterial action to divide the polymer into monomeric components. During enzymatic degradation, the monomers are mineralized and metabolic products including CO 2 , H 2 O, CH 4 , and N 2 , are released. These products can play a key role in removing hazardous plastics from the environment. One of these gases, methane, is an important component of biogas, which can be burned to generate electricity and heat, or used in the synthesis of various organic acids ( Arutchelvi et al., 2008 ). Enzymes are biological catalysts that participate in reactions by acting on specific substrates, accelerating their conversion into valuable products. The propensity for plastic to deteriorate, which harms our environment, has brought attention to the ability of microbes to break down such materials. The initial breakdown of plastics is primarily carried out by microbial enzymes (extracellular or intracellular), which facilitate the disintegration of polymer chains within the cell. Several enzymes capable of degrading various plastics have been identified in organisms ranging from algae, actinomycetes, bacteria, and fungi (  Fig. 3  ) ( Urbanek et al., 2021 ). One key group of enzymes are “hydrolases,” which play a role in chemical bond cleavage in the presence of water, causing a large molecule to split into smaller ones. When a product (A–B) is broken down by a hydrolase enzyme in the presence of water, the typical reaction is as follows:    (1)  A–B + H  2 O→A–OH + B–H The hydrolases involved in the breakdown of polymeric polymers undergo a two-step process where long carbon chains are split into smaller pieces. Every plastic found in the environment is hydrophobic by nature. The initial phase in the interaction between enzymes and polymers is adhesion of the extra-cellular microbial enzymes to the plastic surface via hydrophobic interactions. The active region of several hydrolases contains a hydrophobic cleft that accepts hydrophobic groups from the polymer, expanding the accessibility of the enzyme to the polymer (  Wilkes & Aristilde, 2017 ). In the second stage, the active site of the enzyme takes part in the hydrolytic cleavage of the long polymer chains into smaller monomers or dimers, which can be consumed by the microbial organism and used as a source of carbon. Fig. 4  presents a diagrammatic illustration of this process.   3  Biotechnological developments in plastic degradation  To mitigate plastic pollution, considerable research has been conducted recently in the area of plastic biodegradation. This section aims to highlight the numerous recent advancements in this field.    3.1  Identification of new microbes that degrade plastic  The microbial strains involved in plastic degradation were characterized using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. These identified plastic-decomposing strains have been used in subsequent biodegradation studies to gauge their polymer degradation performance (  Montazer et al., 2018 ). Table 2  and Fig. 5  provide an inventory of newly identified microbial strains capable of decomposing plastic, along with the plastic-degrading capacities of isolated microorganisms and enzymes, respectively. The gut microbiomes of some wax worm species have been demonstrated by several studies to utilize plastic substrates as their only carbon source. The presence of microorganisms from the earthworm Lumbricus Terrestris significantly reduced the particle sizes of LDPE microplastics ( Huerta Lwanga et al., 2018 ). The plastic-degrading enzymes Ceres and Demetra were found in the gut microbiota and saliva of Galleria mellonella wax worms ( Sanluis-Verdes et al., 2022 ). These enzymes can oxidize and depolymerize polyethylene when given sufficient time to act at a pH of 7 (room temperature). Due to their important role in the disintegration of polymers, identifying novel enzymes that degrade plastic is essential. These findings will encourage more research into discovery of new plastic-degrading enzymes in the environment for more efficient biodegradation of diverse polymers.   3.2  Use of recombinant enzymes and cell-free methods  Plastics can be enzymatically degraded using either a cell-free method or conventional whole-cell biocatalysis. Fermentation of microbes is a typical first step in plastic biodegradation experiments under optimal conditions (e.g., pH, nutrient supplementation, and temperature). Following whole-cell biocatalysis, plastic samples are incubated with microbial strains at high cell densities in the biodegradation medium. However, following the initial fermentation stage, the microbial cells used in the cell-free process must be disrupted. Plastic samples can be hatched with crude cell lysate for biodegradation tests or undergo further purification to obtain pure proteins for plastic biodegradation. In conventional whole-cell biocatalysis, wild-type or recombinant microorganisms secrete plastic-degrading enzymes that cause polymer fragmentation. Using the whole-cell approach, the presence of oxygen, operational temperature, and pH are critical parameters for ensuring the survival and proliferation of microorganisms that express the enzymes needed for decomposition of plastics (  Samak et al., 2020 ). Whole-cell biocatalysis has been recommended for use in biodegradation of polyolefins, which have carbon backbone topologies ( Ren & Zimmermann, 2017 ). Because the biodegradation enzymes for these polymers have not yet been discovered, bioinformatics analysis along with the use of wild-type strains in the standard whole-cell method can help identify the putative enzymes responsible for efficient biodegradation of such polymers. As an example, an unexplored PET-degrading enzyme, PETase, was discovered through whole-genome and RNA sequencing of  Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F6 following its initial isolation. Therefore, the current search for new enzymes to aid in rapid biodegradation of various polymers could benefit from a similar strategy. The heterologous expression of these enzymes in multiple host microbes is made possible by accurate identification of genes that encode plastic-degrading enzymes. This strategy is beneficial when wild-type strains struggle to thrive in artificial environments. Some well-established microbial hosts can easily over-express certain enzymes, enhancing the performance of the target enzymes. Although the recombinant expression of plastic-degrading enzymes is generally recognized for PET degradation, enzymes capable of biodegradation of other polymers are less well reported. Enzymes isolated from recombinant cell lysate before their use in plastic biodegradation studies allowing catalytic processes in an unfavorable environment for cell growth, increasing the overall flexibility of the process. However, the cost of enzyme purification is a significant barrier to the cell-free method. Therefore, unrefined denzymes have also been utilized in biodegradation studies to streamline the process and reduce costs ( Potnuri et al., 2022a ; Zhang et al., 2020 ).   3.3  Synergistic activity of chimeric enzymes  Chimeric enzymes, also known as fusion proteins, are proteins created by splicing together the genes of two or more unrelated proteins. The resulting protein is a single, integrated molecule with traits shared by all of the proteins involved in the fusion. Due to their diverse features, well-engineered hybrid proteins offer numerous possibilities and are utilized across various fields. Therefore, employing multiple enzyme systems to accelerate plastic biodegradation appears to be a highly effective strategy. Their common catalytic and substrate selectivity mechanisms make enzymes well suited for use in polymer breakdown (  Tan et al., 2013 ). The cooperation of two enzymes in the biodegradation of PET is a good example.   3.4  Methods to speed up biodegradation of plastic  Along with research into new strains and enzymes capable of breaking down plastic, developing methods to accelerate known biodegradation processes are essential. Many polyolefin plastics have been pre-treated with UV radiation, thermal processing, or chemical processes to make them more susceptible to biodegradation. Their extreme hydrophobicity, which arises from their hydrocarbon chain structures, inhibits microorganism activity during biodegradation. Therefore, the biodegradation procedure, which entails the incubation of microorganism-pretreated plastics, is enhanced up by the oxidation of polymers due to abiotic pre-treatment effects (  Mohanan et al., 2020 ). New pre-treatment techniques such as plasma treatment ( Gómez-Méndez et al., 2018 ) and gamma irradiation ( Sheik et al., 2015 ) have been investigated for their ability to speed up the overall plastic biodegradation process. Functional groups (such as carboxyl, ester, and carbonyl) can also be synthesized within the polymer chain during plastic pre-treatment. Several studies have also noted changes in the surface morphologies of polymers following pre-treatment, where pre-treated plastics were shown to degrade more quickly than untreated polymers.   4  Protein engineering and synthetic biology to improve enzyme performance  Because they meet rigorous criteria for reaction conditions and high substrate specificity, enzymes are an attractive approach for environmentally friendly waste handling and plastic waste recycling by biocatalysts (  Ren & Zimmermann, 2017 ; Webb et al., 2013 ). However, their slow turnover rate and poor thermostability make most naturally occurring plastic-degrading enzymes (PDEs) unsuitable for use in biotechnology ( Zhu et al., 2022 ). Fortunately, the performance of enzymes in an industrial setting can be improved by protein engineering. Improvements in enzyme structure and function modification capabilities thanks to rapid algorithm development have allowed for faster, more precise alteration target identification ( Cui et al., 2021 ). Engineering PET-degrading enzymes with new properties has been conducted to improve degradability. Protein engineering efforts have continued following the 2016 discovery of IsPETase, with multiple groups reporting its structure and key catalytic residues ( Joo et al., 2018 ). Modifying a protein through rational design involves using computational simulations and prior knowledge of protein structure and modeling ( Tiwari et al., 2012 ). Engineering studies have successfully improved the activity of the IsPETase for improved PET and polyfuranoate (PEF) degradation ( Austin et al., 2018 ). A computational approach was employed to increase the melting temperature of IsPETase by 31 °C, which produced a 300-fold increase in the breakdown of semicrystalline PET ( Cui et al., 2021 ). A chimera of the I.sakainesis two-enzyme system that includes IsPETase and the downstream MHETase enzyme, which cleaves mono(2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalate into terephthalic acid and ethylene glycol, has been shown to accelerate the breakdown of PET ( Knott et al., 2020 ). To increase its thermostability and PET depolymerization, Tournier et al. (2020) resynthesized PET from its monomers by altering the PETase isolated from composted leaf-branch material. This “proof-of-concept” design highlights the potential of biocatalytic recycling for a sustainable plastic economy. In order to achieve specific objectives, synthetic biology attempts to modify or redesign existing biological systems. This procedure can be streamlined using computational biology, which facilitates the theoretical design step by using environmental sequence data (  El Karoui et al., 2019 ). Microalgae have been genetically engineered ( Moog et al., 2019 ) to release PDEs, which break down plastic and mediate polyethylene terephthalate (PET) degradation. The biocatalytic upcycling of PET to polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) was demonstrated by Tiso et al. (2022) via enzymatic breakdown of PET in stages followed by PHA production utilizing the liberated monomers in a modified Pseudomonas species. Synthetic biology represents a promising area for innovation that could eventually provide environmentally friendly waste management methods. Enhancing the catalytic activity of plastic-degrading enzymes by protein engineering techniques is an emerging field of study. Generally, there are two approaches to protein engineering: rational design and directed evolution. Rational design involves altering the target protein and mechanistic characteristics based on an understanding of the protein structure, and uses computational simulation and modeling. Due to the abundance of structural and mechanistic data for many of these enzymes, rational design has been the method of choice in nearly all recent articles on developing enzymes that degrade plastic. The absence of effective methods for high-throughput screening is a significant barrier to further enzyme development. The only known attempt to date at engineering PHB depolymerize from  Ralstonia pickettii T1 through direct development resulted in no mutants with improved activity ( Tan et al., 2013 ). As a result, the discussion in this part will centered on rational design techniques for enhancing plastic-degrading enzymes. Figs. 6–9     illustrate these techniques and Table 3  provides examples of protein engineering of enzymes that degrade plastic.   4.1  Strategies to enhance enzyme thermostability  Enzyme thermostability, especially for plastics with high glass transition temperatures (  T  g ), such as PET (∼65–70 °C), is crucial in industrial plastic depolymerization. At temperatures approaching or exceeding T  g , the mobility and flexibility of the polymer chains increase, assisting their attachment to the surface of the enzyme and access to the active site, which increases the degradation efficiency ( Ren & Zimmermann, 2017 ). However, the limited thermal stability of naturally occurring enzymes that degrade plastic poses a significant obstacle to practical applications. Successful strategies to increase the thermal stability of plastic-degrading enzymes are described here, and have drawn inspiration from the structural properties of thermophilic proteins. First, the thermostability of plastic-degrading enzymes can be improved by adding disulfide links or salt bridges (  Fig. 6 ) ( Zhong-Johnson et al., 2021 ). Proteins rely on disulfide bonds and salt bridges to fold into a local or global shape that helps provide heat resistance. The thermostability of a protein can therefore be altered by introducing a disulfide bond by switching out residues at a bonding metal site. For instance, the TfCut2 esterase from Thermobifidafusca created a disulfide bond when the D204C and E253C mutations were introduced into the calcium-binding region, thereby increasing the temperature at which the proteins break down and the rate of plastic hydrolysis ( Then et al., 2016 ). The thermostability of the modified PETaseN246D was improved by forming a salt bridge that connects the positively charged Arg280 residue and the negatively charged N246D residue ( Son et al., 2019 ). Additionally, the formation of disulfide bonds and salt bridges could jointly act to increase enzyme thermostability ( Then et al., 2016 ). Another strategy to improve thermostability is to engineer the creation of hydrogen bonds in the region responsible for maintaining a more stable enzyme structure ( Cui et al., 2021 ). The hydrogen bond preserves higher-order protein structures, which enhances structural stability and extreme temperature tolerance. The thermostability of PETase, for instance, might be greatly enhanced by a hydrogen bond formed through water between the residues S121E and N172 in the very flexible 6–7 connecting loop region ( Son et al., 2019 ).   4.2  Strengthening substrate attachment to an enzyme active site  Work on engineering plastic-degrading enzymes has focused on the active site region because the efficiency of plastic depolymerization is critically dependent on the contact between the substrate and enzyme active site (  Fecker et al., 2018 ). Widening the aperture of the active site is a typical approach for improving access to the plastic substrate ( Fig. 7 ). The work on engineering Fusarium solani cutinase was an initial effort toward achieving this goal ( Araújo et al., 2007 ). The L182A mutant, which exhibited a larger active site opening due to amino acid residue mutation, displayed higher hydrolytic activity toward PET and polyamide (PA) fibers ( Araújo et al., 2007 ). Similar techniques have been used to successfully enhance the ability of other enzymes to break down PET and PBSA plastics, including PETase, Cut190, MHETase, and Pseudomonas aestusnigri hydrolase ( Bollinger et al., 2020 ). However, a larger substrate binding space does not always equate to better catalytic activity due to the possibility of reducing the affinity of the substrate because of a reduced ability to bind. Narrowing the active site has actually proved helpful in some situations. According to the study of Austin et al. (2018) , PET was more effectively degraded when the PETase active site was narrowed by the S238F and W159H mutations. Similarly, the new alternative poly(ethylene furanoate) (PEF) was also degraded because S238F creates a stacking interaction and W159H allows the substrate to sit deeper within the active site cleft ( Austin et al., 2018 ). Another potential engineering target is the hydrophobicity of the substrate binding groove in the active site ( Fig. 7 ). Due to a higher affinity, improving hydrophobicity may be advantageous for binding to plastic substrates and the efficiency of degradation, as shown with PETase ( Ma et al., 2018 ). Furthermore, enzyme catalytic activity may be enhanced by altering the hydrophobicity and opening size of the active site.   4.3  Strengthening the interaction between the substrate and the enzyme surface  Increased biocatalytic efficacy of plastic-degrading enzymes has been achieved by modifying the surface characteristics to improve the enzyme interaction with substrates, because the substrate binding process is controlled by electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions between the substrate molecules and amino acid residues on the enzyme surface (  Ribitsch et al., 2017 ). Consequently, it is it is common practice to modify these surface properties ( Fig. 8 ). Enhanced substrate interaction can be produced by fusing the binding accessories to an enzyme surface ( Fig. 8 ). This strategy was inspiring by the finding that many enzymes involved in the breakdown of natural biopolymers include a second binding domain devoted to the adherence of polymer substrates ( Armenta et al., 2017 ). Therefore, heterologous binding modules can be added to plastic-degrading enzymes to improve their interaction with the plastic surface, despite their lack of such a function. For example, enzymes that catalyze the breakdown of carbohydrates generate carbohydrate-binding modules (CBMs), which are capable of promiscuously binding to a wide range of polymers ( Weber et al., 2019 ). In one study, Trichoderma reesei CBM fused to cutinase Thc_Cut1 was shown to improve hydrolysis efficiency and binding capacity to the PET surface ( Ribitsch et al., 2017 ).   4.4  Refining additional enzyme functionalities  Efforts to improve plastic-degrading enzymes have been conducted in other areas, including lowering the effects of product inhibition, allowing for catalytic promiscuity in the enzyme, and producing versatile biocatalysts (  Fig. 9 ). First, enzyme activity can be inhibited by intermediates or products of plastic degradation ( Groβ et al., 2017 ), and this inhibition can be minimized by changing the architecture of an active site. For example, the G62A mutation in the substrate binding groove of TfCut2 resulted in a 5.5-fold decrease in the binding constant for the inhibitory hydrolysis product, mono (2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalate (MHET), thus resulting in improved PET degradation ( Ren et al., 2016 ). Additionally, fusion with an additional enzyme that can break down the intermediate molecules has been shown to reduce product inhibition ( Barth et al., 2016 ). Enabling catalytic promiscuity can increase the capacity of plastic-degrading enzymes to employ a wide variety of plastic substrates, which can speed up the degradation process. This is especially useful for polymers with few known enzymes capable of efficiently degrading them (such as PAs and PUs) ( Chen et al., 2020 ). Recent ground-breaking research showed that synthesized PAs can be depolymerized by a cutinase called Thc_Cut1, in which the promiscuous amidase activity was enhanced ( Biundo et al., 2019 ). Residues that may prevent water molecules from interacting with the transition state were chosen for mutation, resulting in a 6–15-fold increase in hydrolytic activity ( Biundo et al., 2019 ). In addition, bifunctional biocatalysts for increased depolymerization efficiency have been created by fusing a plastic-degrading enzyme with another supporting enzyme. For instance, based on the concept that lipase largely cleaves the polymeric backbone of PCL into low-molecular-weight oligomers, a fusion protein composed of lipase and cutinase (Lip-Cut) was developed with significantly increased PCL hydrolysis activity. In contrast, cutinase further hydrolyzes these low-molecular weight oligomers into soluble ones. Similarly, compared with wild-type PETase, a synergistic fusion of PETase and MHETase has been shown to triple the hydrolysis efficiency of PET.    5  Valorization of plastic wastes to stimulate the circular economy  Here, we discuss opportunities to turn materials produced from the biodegradation of plastic into value-added materials, which will aid in scaling up plastic biodegradation and yielding economic benefits. Research in this context has focused on finding new uses for plastic biodegradation products to advance the circular plastics economy. Although the low cost of producing PET has hindered incentives for PET recycling (  Del Mar Castro López et al., 2014 ), PET hydrolases have recently been discovered and engineered, offering new perspectives and the possibility of PET biotransformation and valorization. By combining metabolic engineering and synthetic biology, hydrolyzed PET monomers can be transformed into valuable substances that reduce the cost of recycling PET. These PET monomers can potentially find uses as ingredients in animal feed, medications, cosmetics, and fragrances ( Fig. 10  ). Terephthalic acid generated as a result of PET biodegradation has been utilized in the production of PET bottles that exhibit comparable mechanical and physical characteristics to petrochemical PET bottles ( Tournier et al., 2020 ). Aromatic chemicals (such as gallic acid, pyrogallol, catechol, muconic acid, and vanillic acid) have been biologically synthesized from terephthalic acid by use of a modified Escherichia coli strain ( Kim et al., 2019 ) ( Table 4  ). Furthermore, biotransformation of terephthalic acid into vanillin, which is a crucial ingredient in the food, cosmetics, and pharmaceutical sectors, has been accomplished via one-pot depolymerization of PET by LCC and subsequent biotransformation into vanillin utilizing a modified E. coli, marking the first demonstration of biological recycling of post-consumer PET waste into a high-value industrial chemical ( Sadler & Wallace, 2021 ). While the complete biodegradation of other synthetic polymers (such as HDPE, LDPE, PVC, PS and PP) has not yet been documented, efforts have already been made to monetize the monomers and shorter chain molecules produced by chemical depolymerization of plastics. Styrene, a PS monomer, has been bio-transformed into mandelic acid by a 4-step enzyme cascade reaction, which yields up to 70%. This biological synthesis of mandelic acid not only decreases the use of harmful cyanide material, which is traditionally necessary for mandelic acid production, but it also promotes the cyclical economy of the plastics industry and offers an ecologically friendly and sustainable production method. Additionally, alkenes and branched-chain fatty alcohols created from pyrolysis of PP can be converted into value-added fatty acids through fermentation with  Yarrowia lipolytica strain 78–003 ( Mihreteab et al., 2019 ). These studies demonstrate that valuable degradation byproducts are possible, and serve to encourage further research into successful plastic degradation. An area of positive development is the ongoing effort to establish long-term strategies for managing plastic waste and in turn, to discover fresh, nonfossil-based polymers such as polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs).  Sangiorgio et al. (2021) investigated Tenebrio molitor (TM) as a beneficial organism for plastic degradation and the biological recovery of new biopolymers (e.g., PHA) from plastic-producing microbes, utilizing its highly diversified gut microbiota. However, management of plastic waste using TM entails certain concerns. Plastic-degrading bacteria are known to be present in the microbiota of TM. Improved TM-based plastic breakdown is achieved through co-feeding with food waste as a dietary energy source, thus increasing the worth of these low-value materials through a circular economy approach. A TM bioreactor would be an acceptable substitute to conventional PHA recovery methods, and would provide the benefits of producing highly pure PHA, protein biomass, and rearing waste that could be used to produce fertilizers, chitin/chitosan, biochar, and biodiesel. In summary, eco-friendly waste management relies on the efficient breakdown of man-made polymers and the transformation of waste materials into useful compounds.   6  Conclusions  Enzyme biocatalysts present an environmentally friendly option for managing and recycling plastic waste. It is possible to incorporate enzyme-mediated biocatalytic degradation into existing plastic recycling frameworks, complementing or potentially replacing current chemical recycling methods. Modifying the active sites of enzymes is one potential strategy for improving the stability of plastic-degrading enzymes, allowing them to function in a broader range of environments. Additionally, engineering a single functional system suitable for more than two types of plastics broadens the spectrum of plastic degradability within a single test. New opportunities to obtain novel biocatalysts with ideal properties for efficient and cost-effective plastic depolymerization have emerged as a result of the rapid advancements in synthetic biology and protein engineering, which provide a wealth of powerful toolkits for the discovery, characterization, and modification of plastic-degrading enzymes. Plastic waste's biotransformation and recycling plastic waste could help promote a circular economy, assisting in the large-scale reduction of environmental pollution and encouraging economic expansion.    7  Future directions  Emerging research underscores the need to standardize methodologies for isolating microorganisms that produce plastic-degrading enzymes. This will increase enzyme yields from pure colonies, which in turn will accelerate the polymer degradation process. Bio-upcycling is increasingly recognized as a viable solution to the problem of plastic waste. However, its commercialization has not yet fully materialized, despite ongoing efforts to identify microorganisms and enzymes capable of degrading and valorizing plastic waste. Further investigation into multi-enzyme or multi-microbial strategies is necessary to overcome these challenges; systems metabolic engineering is critical for creating strains of microbes with enhanced capabilities for degrading and monetizing plastic.